refactor volumes page into core, external (#25042)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/storage/volumes.md

<!-- overview -->

> File storage is useful when building stateful applications. Use _volumes_ to declaratively manage storage for containers. The Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip text="volume" term_id="volume" >}} abstraction allows files to persist even beyond the lifetime of a pod. Volumes also allow different containers within a pod to share storage and to access configuration.

Reviewer: File storage is sometimes also useful when building stateless applications. For example, an `emptyDir` volume can be used for a cache, or a Pod might mount service account data via a volume.
I recommend rewording to avoid implying that only stateful apps would use volumes.

Author: good point

> Familiarity with [Pods](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod/) is suggested.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
Familiarity with [Pods](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) is suggested.
```

<!-- body -->

## Introduction

By default, everything with the filesystems of a container is ephemeral. During startup, each pod in a container gets a filesystem created based on the layers in its {{< glossary_tooltip text="container image" term_id="image" >}}. When a container is restarted or destroyed, that root filesystem, including any modifications to it, is lost.

> A Kubernetes volume's lifecycle is tied to the *pod* that encloses it. The pod maintains the volume as different containers are started or stopped. Multiple volumes of any type may be connected to a pod. The [PersistentVolume](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) abstraction builds on the volume concept to provide storage that outlasts the lifetime of a pod.

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
A Kubernetes volume's lifecycle is tied to the *pod* that encloses it. The pod maintains the volume as different containers are started or stopped. Multiple volumes of any type may be connected to a pod. The [PersistentVolume](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) abstraction builds on the volume concept to let pods access storage that outlasts the lifetime of a pod.
```

Author: I was attempting to avoid passive voice, but in this case it's the best option.

   * [fc (fibre channel)](#fc)
   * [gitRepo (deprecated)](#gitrepo)
   * [glusterfs](#glusterfs)
   * [hostPath](#hostpath)
   * [iscsi](#iscsi)
   * [local](#local)
   * [nfs](#nfs)
   * [projected](#projected)
   * [rbd](#rbd)
   * [secret](#secret)

### Storage plugins

A [persistentVolumeClaim](#persistentvolumeclaim) is a declarative way to ask for storage, without preference for the underlying implementation. 

This is powered by storage plugins. More specifically, Kubernetes implements the {{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Storage Interface" term_id="csi" >}} (CSI),
which lets developers implement storage plugins without needing to make changes to the code of
Kubernetes itself. Visit
[Kubernetes Container Storage Interface Documentation])(https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/)
to learn more about CSI. 

[FlexVolume](#flexvolume) is an another mechanism for storage plugins. Unlike CSI, FlexVolume is
more closely tied to Kubernetes and its storage implementation. FlexVolume was developed before CSI.

Storage plugin interfaces:

   * [CSI](#csi)
   * [FlexVolume](#flexvolume)
   * [persistentVolumeClaim](#persistentvolumeclaim)

### External Volume Types

> The Kubernetes binary includes some volume types for communicating with externally managed volumes, such as AWS EBS or Azure Disk Storage. These volume types are described as in-tree storage plugins. 

Reviewer: There is no `kubernetes` binary. Maybe reword?

The CSI was introduced to standardize connectivity to externally managed volumes, such as cloud platform storage. However, Kubernetes still includes many volume types for connecting to specific cloud storage providers. 

External Volume Types:
   * [awsElasticBlockStore](#awselasticblockstore)
   * [azureDisk](#azuredisk)
   * [azureFile](#azurefile)
   * [cinder](#cinder)
   * [flocker](#flocker)
   * [gcePersistentDisk](#gcepersistentdisk)
   * [portworxVolume](#portworxvolume)
   * [quobyte](#quobyte)
   * [storageos](#storageos)
   * [scaleIO](#scaleio)
   * [vsphereVolume](#vspherevolume)

## Specify subPaths on volumes {#using-subpath}

> Sometimes, it is useful to share one volume for multiple uses in a single pod. The `volumeMounts.subPath` property specifies a sub-path inside the referenced volume instead of its root.

Reviewer: `volumeMounts.subPath` can be useful even if the volume is mounted just once in a Pod. For example, if the volume layout is determined externally from Kubernetes.

In this example we mount the same volume twice, and that's useful to show that it's possible.

Author: I reworded this to indicate the multiple mounts in a pod is an example.

The following example shows how to configure a Pod with a LAMP stack (Linux Apache MySQL PHP)
using a single, shared volume. This sample `subPath` configuration is not recommended
for production use.

The PHP application's code and assets map to the volume's `html` folder and
the MySQL database is stored in the volume's `mysql` folder. For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-lamp-site
spec:
    containers:
    - name: mysql
      image: mysql
      env:
      # password in config yaml for testing only
      # use a Kubernetes Secret in production
      - name: MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD
        value: "rootpasswd"
      volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /var/lib/mysql
        name: site-data
        subPath: mysql
    - name: php
      image: php:7.0-apache
      volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /var/www/html
        name: site-data
        subPath: html
    volumes:
    - name: site-data
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: my-lamp-site-data
```

Note: The password is defined in the config yaml, which is insecure. See Kubernetes Secrets for a secure solution.

> ## Core Volume Types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Built-in volume types
```

The full list of built-in volume types could move to the reference section; for example, in a follow-up PR.

### cephfs

A `cephfs` volume mounts an existing CephFS volume to your pod. CephFS can be mounted by multiple writers simultaneously.

See the [CephFS example](https://github.com/kubernetes/examples/tree/{{< param "githubbranch" >}}/volumes/cephfs/) for more details.

### configMap

A [ConfigMap](/docs/concepts/configuration/configmap/) 
exports configuration data to a pod's filesystem. A `configMap` volume references data stored in a `ConfigMap` object. Containerized applications use the data from the volume. 

You must create a [ConfigMap](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-pod-configmap/) 
before you can use it.

{{< note >}}

> A container using a ConfigMap as a [subPath](#using-subpath) volume mount will not receive ConfigMap updates.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
A container using a ConfigMap as a [subPath](#using-subpath) volume mount does not receive ConfigMap updates.
```

<!-- overview -->

File storage is useful when building stateful applications. Use volumes to declaratively manage storage for containers. The Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip text="volume" term_id="volume" >}} abstraction facilitates sharing files between containers on the same `Pod`, and allows files to persist when a container is restarted. 

Familiarity with [Pods](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod/) is suggested.

<!-- body -->

## Background

Files stored within the root filesystem of a container are ephemeral. When a container is restarted or destroyed, it's root filesystem contents are destroyed with it. 

A Kubernetes volume's lifecycle is tied to the *pod* that encloses it. The pod maintains the volume as different containers are started or stopped. Multiple volumes of any type may be connected to a pod.

At its core, a volume is just a directory, possibly with some data in it, which
is accessible to the containers in a pod.  How that directory comes to be, the
medium that backs it, and the contents of it are determined by the particular

> volume type used.

Author: I added a brief mention of this. I'm considering opening an issue to add docs for volumeMode Block

> volume type used.

Reviewer: “At its core, a volume is just a directory” is incorrect in the original. An issue about cleaning that up sounds like a good idea.

> volume type used.

Author: I changed this to "One use case for volumes is providing directories to pods, possibly with some data in it."

Kubernetes supports a variety of different volume types, such as directories from the host system and NFS mounts. 
 

### Volume Specification Example
 
First, specify a pod that will provide the volume. 

The `Pod` specification includes what `volumes` to provide -- the 
`.spec.volumes` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: sample-cache-pod
spec:
  volumes:
    - name: cache-volume
      emptyDir: {}
```

Second, specify a mount point within each container via the
`.spec.containers[*].volumeMounts` field. 

Volumes can not mount into other volumes, or have hard links to
other volumes. Each container in the pod's configuration must independently specify where to

> mount each volume. 

Author: given that this is an example, I think it's fair to have the example stay in the scope of filesystem volumes. I clarified this at the start of the example.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: sample-cache-pod
spec:
  volumes:
    [...]
  containers:
    - name: test
      image: busybox
      volumeMounts:
        - name: cache-volume
          mountPath: /etc/cache

```

### Core Volume Types

Kubernetes supports several types of `Volumes`. These core volume types are 
integrated into Kubernetes, and include network storage volume types and storage provided by the pod itself. 

Core Volume Types:
   * [cephfs](#cephfs)
   * [configMap](#configmap)
   * [downwardAPI](#downwardapi)
   * [emptyDir](#emptydir)
   * [fc (fibre channel)](#fc)
   * [gitRepo (deprecated)](#gitrepo)
   * [glusterfs](#glusterfs)
   * [hostPath](#hostpath)
   * [iscsi](#iscsi)
   * [local](#local)
   * [nfs](#nfs)
   * [projected](#projected)
   * [rbd](#rbd)

>    * [secret](#secret)

Author: how about I move cephfs, gitRepo, glusterfs, rbd to the other category

and keep iscsi and nfs, as they are long standing generic network storage protocols

>    * [secret](#secret)

Reviewer: iSCSI and NFS both have CSI drivers so I'd include those in the “tied to particular technologies” grouping.

### Volume Plugin Interfaces

> Kubernetes implements the Container Storage Interface (CSI). CSI is the modern way to communicate with out-of-tree plugins for externaly managed volumes. More specifically, CSI is a standard for exposing arbitrary block and file storage systems to containerized workloads. Learn more with the [CSI docs](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/).

Reviewer: I'd write:
```suggestion
Kubernetes implements the {{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Storage Interface" term_id="csi" >}} (CSI),
which lets developers implement storage plugins without needing to make changes to the code of
Kubernetes itself. Visit
[Kubernetes Container Storage Interface Documentation])(https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/)
to learn more about CSI.
```

*Out-of-tree* storage plugins are not part of the kubernetes binary. 

> `FlexVolume` is an alternate way to communicate with out of tree volume plugins. `FlexVolume` was developed before CSI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[FlexVolume](#flexvolume) is an another mechanism for storage plugins. Unlike CSI, FlexVolume is
more closely tied to Kubernetes and its storage implementation. FlexVolume was developed before CSI.
```
I would not write `FlexVolume`, though, because when readers are specifying it as a volume type they are most likely to write `flexVolume`. To me, using FlexVolume just as a proper noun is OK.

   * [CSI](#CSI)
   * [FlexVolume](#flexVolume)

>    * [persistentVolumeClaim](#persistentvolumeclaim)

Reviewer: These aren't really rival technologies; PVCs are relevant to both CSI and FlexVolume. I would omit this list.

Author: I think it's important to keep this list. It's at least a listing of the storage plugin related page sections. I refreshed the description here to indicate that PVCs are a generic way to consume different storage plugins.

> ### External Volume Types

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this heading covers. I'd expect to see `cephfs`, `gitRepo`, `glusterfs`, `iscsi`, `nfs` and `rbd` listed in the same group as `gcePersistentDisk`, `cinder` and the others here.

Author: The goal here was to include externally _managed_ volumes, such as storage as a service from cloud providers. It's a hazier distinction that I expected. I commented above about the category location for specific types.

The Kubernetes binary includes some volume types for communicating with externally manged volumes, such as AWS EBS or Azure Disk Storage. These volume types are described as in-tree storage plugins. 

The CSI was introduced to standardize connecting to externally managed volumes, such as cloud platform storage. However, Kubernetes still includes many volume types for connecting to specific cloud storage providers. 

External Volume Types:
   * [awsElasticBlockStore](#awselasticblockstore)
   * [azureDisk](#azuredisk)
   * [azureFile](#azurefile)
   * [cinder](#cinder)
   * [flocker](#flocker)
   * [gcePersistentDisk](#gcepersistentdisk)
   * [portworxVolume](#portworxvolume)
   * [quobyte](#quobyte)
   * [storageos](#storageos)
   * [scaleIO](#scaleio)
   * [vsphereVolume](#vspherevolume)

## Mount propagation

Mount propagation allows for sharing volumes mounted by a container to
other containers in the same pod, or even to other pods on the same node.

> Mount propagation of a volume is controlled by the `mountPropagation` field in `Container.volumeMounts`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mount propagation of a volume is controlled by the `mountPropagation` field within `volumeMounts`.
```
?

Its values are:

> * `None` - This volume mount will not receive any subsequent mounts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `None` - This volume mount does not receive any subsequent mounts
```
Also I'd mention that it's default just after `None`.

  that are mounted to this volume or any of its subdirectories by the host.
  In similar fashion, no mounts created by the container will be visible on
  the host. This is the default mode.

  This mode is equal to `private` mount propagation as described in the
  [Linux kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/sharedsubtree.txt)

> * `HostToContainer` - This volume mount will receive all subsequent mounts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `HostToContainer` - This volume mount receives all subsequent mounts
```

  that are mounted to this volume or any of its subdirectories.

  In other words, if the host mounts anything inside the volume mount, the
  container will see it mounted there.

  Similarly, if any pod with `Bidirectional` mount propagation to the same
  volume mounts anything there, the container with `HostToContainer` mount
  propagation will see it.

  This mode is equal to `rslave` mount propagation as described in the
  [Linux kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/sharedsubtree.txt)

* `Bidirectional` - This volume mount behaves the same the `HostToContainer` mount.

>   In addition, all volume mounts created by the container will be propagated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In addition, all volume mounts created by the container are propagated
```

  back to the host and to all containers of all pods that use the same volume.

  A typical use case for this mode is a pod with a FlexVolume or CSI driver or
  a pod that needs to mount something on the host using a `hostPath` volume.

  This mode is equal to `rshared` mount propagation as described in the
  [Linux kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/sharedsubtree.txt)

  {{< warning >}}
  `Bidirectional` mount propagation can be dangerous. It can damage
  the host operating system and therefore it is allowed only in privileged  

>   containers. Familiarity with Linux kernel behavior is strongly recommend  ed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   containers. Familiarity with Linux kernel behavior is strongly recommended.
```

  In addition, any volume mounts created by containers in pods must be destroyed

>   (unmounted) by the Containers on termination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (unmounted) by the containers on termination.
```
?

(Also: I'm not sure what this sentence aims to convey).

Author: I just removed that unclear sentence, I think the general warning is sufficent.

  {{< /warning >}}

> ### Mount Propagation Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Mount propagation configuration
```
Could this move to a new task page? If someone is new to Kubernetes, they are going to see a lot of _very_ detailed information before they have even understood what Kubernetes means by a new volume. I'm genuinely worried about driving readers away if there's too much detail too early.

Author: What do you think about mount propagation as a separate concept page under storage?

I think the config section is too small to survive on it's own under tasks.

Before mount propagation can work properly on some deployments (CoreOS,
RedHat/Centos, Ubuntu) mount share must be configured correctly in
Docker as shown below.

Edit your Docker's `systemd` service file. Set `MountFlags` as follows:
```shell
MountFlags=shared
```

Or, remove `MountFlags=slave` if present. Then restart the Docker daemon:

```shell
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl restart docker
```

> ## Specifiy subPaths on Volumes {#using-subpath}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Specify subPaths on volumes {#using-subpath}
```

Sometimes, it is useful to share one volume for multiple uses in a single pod. The `volumeMounts.subPath` property specifies a sub-path inside the referenced volume instead of its root.

The following example shows how to configure a Pod with a LAMP stack (Linux Apache MySQL PHP)
using a single, shared volume. This sample `subPath` configuration is not recommended
for production use.

The PHP application's code and assets map to the volume's `html` folder and

> the MySQL database is stored in the volume's `mysql` folder. For example:

Reviewer: This also feels like a task more than a concept.

Author: I'll move "Using subPath with expanded environment variables" out, but I think it's worth keeping the general discussion of subpaths here, as it's a simple and relevant feature.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-lamp-site
spec:
    containers:
    - name: mysql
      image: mysql
      env:
      - name: MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD

>         value: "rootpasswd"

Reviewer: This needs a note about Secret management - see https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/run-single-instance-stateful-application/ for an example.

Author: added ✅

In this example, a `Pod` uses `subPathExpr` to create a directory `pod1` within
the `hostPath` volume `/var/log/pods`.
The `hostPath` volume takes the `Pod` name from the `downwardAPI`.
The host directory `/var/log/pods/pod1` is mounted at `/logs` in the container.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod1
spec:
  containers:
  - name: container1
    env:
    - name: POD_NAME
      valueFrom:
        fieldRef:
          apiVersion: v1
          fieldPath: metadata.name
    image: busybox
    command: [ "sh", "-c", "while [ true ]; do echo 'Hello'; sleep 10; done | tee -a /logs/hello.txt" ]
    volumeMounts:
    - name: workdir1
      mountPath: /logs
      subPathExpr: $(POD_NAME)
  restartPolicy: Never
  volumes:
  - name: workdir1
    hostPath:
      path: /var/log/pods
```

## Core Volume Types

### cephfs

A `cephfs` volume allows an existing CephFS volume to be  mounted into your pod. CephFS can be mounted by multiple writers simultaneously.

See the [CephFS example](https://github.com/kubernetes/examples/tree/{{< param "githubbranch" >}}/volumes/cephfs/) for more details.

### configMap

> A [ConfigMap](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-pod-configmap/) 

Reviewer: BTW this could link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/configmap/

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-lamp-site
spec:
    containers:
    - name: mysql
      image: mysql
      env:
      # password in config yaml for testing only
      # use a Kubernetes Secret in production
      - name: MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD
        value: "rootpasswd"
      volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /var/lib/mysql
        name: site-data
        subPath: mysql
    - name: php
      image: php:7.0-apache
      volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /var/www/html
        name: site-data
        subPath: html
    volumes:
    - name: site-data
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: my-lamp-site-data
```

Note: The password is defined in the config yaml, which is insecure. See Kubernetes Secrets for a secure solution.

### Kubernetes core volume types {#volume-types-core}

Kubernetes supports several types of volumes. Kubernetes core volume types are specialized volume types (mostly ephemeral) and are not used for general purpose persistent storage use cases. 

Core Volume Types:

   * [configMap](#configmap)
   * [downwardAPI](#downwardapi)
   * [emptyDir](#emptydir)
   * [gitRepo (deprecated)](#gitrepo)
   * [glusterfs](#glusterfs)
   * [hostPath](#hostpath)

>    * [local](#local)

Reviewer: How come `local` and `hostPath` get separated? I'm OK to keep them in separate sections but we should have a good reason for that (probably a good enough reason that we raise an issue about mentioning it in the docs!).

   * [projected](#projected)
   * [secret](#secret)

### Storage plugins

A [persistentVolumeClaim](#persistentvolumeclaim) is a declarative way to ask for storage, without preference for the underlying implementation. 

This is powered by storage plugins. Kubernetes implements the {{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Storage Interface" term_id="csi" >}} (CSI),
which lets developers implement storage plugins without needing to make changes to the code of
Kubernetes itself. Visit
[Kubernetes Container Storage Interface Documentation])(https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/)
to learn more about CSI. 

In contrast to the CSI, some storage plugins are "in-tree" plugins. That is, storage technology specific code inserted into the code of Kubernetes itself, without using the CSI. The C  

[FlexVolume](#flexvolume) is yet another mechanism for storage plugins. Unlike CSI, FlexVolume is
more closely tied to Kubernetes and its storage implementation. FlexVolume was developed before CSI.

Storage plugin interfaces:

   * [CSI](#csi)
   * [FlexVolume](#flexvolume)

>    * [persistentVolumeClaim](#persistentvolumeclaim)

Reviewer: We could split “in tree” into core types like the downward API vs legacy vendor plugins that are in-tree because of their age, but would now not be accepted (you'd be asked to have a good long think about using CSI, right?)

> ### General purpose volume types

Reviewer: Sounds reasonable
I'd clarify below the header, I think.

Kubernetes directly implements some volume types for communicating with externally managed volumes, such as AWS EBS or Azure Disk Storage. These volume types are described as in-tree storage plugins, and are used for general purpose persistent storage. 

> The CSI was introduced to standardize connectivity to externally managed volumes, such as cloud platform storage. However, Kubernetes still includes many volume types for connecting to specific cloud storage providers. 

Reviewer: Is CSI useful outside Kubernetes (like CNI and CRI are)?

<!-- overview -->

> File storage is useful when building applications, such as to store state or cache data. Use _volumes_ to declaratively manage storage for containers. The Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip text="volume" term_id="volume" >}} abstraction allows files to persist even beyond the lifetime of a pod. Volumes also allow different containers within a pod to share storage and to access configuration.

Author: I think this is a fair overview of what the user will learn in this page. Additionally, in context the comment on persistence makes sense.

`The Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip text="volume" term_id="volume" >}} abstraction allows files to persist even beyond the lifetime of a pod. `

Volumes are allowed to persist :)

Familiarity with [Pods](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) is suggested.

<!-- body -->

## Introduction

> By default, everything with the filesystems of a container is ephemeral. During startup, each pod in a container gets a filesystem created based on the layers in its {{< glossary_tooltip text="container image" term_id="image" >}}. When a container is restarted or destroyed, that root filesystem, including any modifications to it, is lost.

Author: Good point. I incorporated your changes. I kept the bit on building the filesystem, as context for the lifecycle.

> By default, everything with the filesystems of a container is ephemeral. During startup, each pod in a container gets a filesystem created based on the layers in its {{< glossary_tooltip text="container image" term_id="image" >}}. When a container is restarted or destroyed, that root filesystem, including any modifications to it, is lost.

Author: Here is how I'm thinking of it.

base knowledge: docker containers (ephemeral filesystem by default)
step 1. the kuberentes volume resource
step 2. the kuberentes persistent volume resource
step 3. the kuberentes ephemeral knowledge resource.

> By default, everything with the filesystems of a container is ephemeral. During startup, each pod in a container gets a filesystem created based on the layers in its {{< glossary_tooltip text="container image" term_id="image" >}}. When a container is restarted or destroyed, that root filesystem, including any modifications to it, is lost.

Author: I changed it to this, in addition to changing the surrounding paragraphs. 

> In a standard docker container, for example, the filesystem of a container is ephemeral. When a container is restarted or destroyed, modifications to the container filesystem are lost.  
> 
> A Kubernetes volume's lifecycle is tied to the *pod* that encloses it.

> A Kubernetes volume's lifecycle is tied to the *pod* that encloses it. The pod maintains the volume as different containers are started or stopped. Multiple volumes of any type may be connected to a pod. The [PersistentVolume](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) abstraction builds on the volume concept to let pods access storage that outlasts the lifetime of a pod.

Author: I need to think on this further.

> A Kubernetes volume's lifecycle is tied to the *pod* that encloses it. The pod maintains the volume as different containers are started or stopped. Multiple volumes of any type may be connected to a pod. The [PersistentVolume](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) abstraction builds on the volume concept to let pods access storage that outlasts the lifetime of a pod.

Author: I think it's confusing how "ephemeral volumes" describes a property of some volumes, while "PersistentVolume" is a specific resource.

> A Kubernetes volume's lifecycle is tied to the *pod* that encloses it. The pod maintains the volume as different containers are started or stopped. Multiple volumes of any type may be connected to a pod. The [PersistentVolume](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) abstraction builds on the volume concept to let pods access storage that outlasts the lifetime of a pod.

Author: I revised the "Volume Lifecycle" section to explain the differences.

> One use case for volumes is providing directories to pods, possibly with some data in it.  How that directory comes to be, the medium that backs it, and the contents of it are determined by the particular volume type used.

Reviewer 2: I think the statement about "providing a filesystem to pods" is pretty basic and should come before the lifecycle part.

Author: Ok, I reorganized some paragraphs to address this.

Kubernetes supports a variety of different volume types, such as directories from the host system and NFS mounts. 

> In addition to filesystem volumes, Kubernetes also supports volumes in a raw block access mode. For example, The `volumeMode` field can be set to `block` in the specifications for PersistentVolume and PersistentVolumeClaim. 

Reviewer 2: "Kubernetes also support persistent volumes"

> ### Volume specification example

Reviewer 2: This seems too early. We don't know what an emptydir volume is yet.

Author: I think it's important to have an example early on, people will usually scroll to it. I added additional description and a link to emptydir.

 
First, specify a pod that will provide the volume. This example uses the `emptyDir` volume type, and includes mounting the volume. 

A `Pod`'s specification defines what `volumes` are available to containers in that pod through the `.spec.volumes` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: sample-cache-pod
spec:
  # other specification, including container definitions
  volumes:
    - name: cache-volume
      emptyDir: {}
```

Second, specify a mount point within each container via the
`.spec.containers[*].volumeMounts` field. 

Volumes can not mount into other volumes, or have hard links to
other volumes. Each container in the pod's configuration must independently specify where to mount each volume. 

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: sample-cache-pod
spec:
  volumes:
    [...]
  containers:
    - name: test
      image: busybox
      volumeMounts:
        - name: cache-volume
          mountPath: /var/cache

```

> ### Core volume types {#volume-types-core}

Reviewer 2: I think it may make more sense to divide the volume types by "kubernetes core" and "general purpose storage".

Kubernetes core are specialized volume types (mostly ephemeral) and are not used for general purpose persistent storage use cases. They include:
- configmap
- downwardapi
- emptydir
- gitrepo
- hostpath
- projected
- secret

The remaining types are all general purpose storage and most commonly used as PersistentVolumes

Author: Ok, I have been spinning my wheels on how to break this down. I think that "Kubernetes core" (i.e., Kubernetes specific), and "general purpose" are better categories. 

I had previously considered "externally hosted" and "native" but there were a number of pitfalls. However, I think "Kubernetes specific" will work well.

Author: I have implemented this change. I sincerely appreciate your insight on this particular issue, it has resolved a persistent (ha) problem I had with this PR.

Kubernetes supports several types of volumes. These core volume types are 
integrated into Kubernetes, and include network storage volume types and storage provided by the pod itself. 

Core Volume Types:
   * [cephfs](#cephfs)
   * [configMap](#configmap)
   * [downwardAPI](#downwardapi)
   * [emptyDir](#emptydir)
   * [fc (fibre channel)](#fc)
   * [gitRepo (deprecated)](#gitrepo)
   * [glusterfs](#glusterfs)
   * [hostPath](#hostpath)
   * [iscsi](#iscsi)
   * [local](#local)
   * [nfs](#nfs)
   * [projected](#projected)
   * [rbd](#rbd)
   * [secret](#secret)

### Storage plugins

> A [persistentVolumeClaim](#persistentvolumeclaim) is a declarative way to ask for storage, without preference for the underlying implementation. 

Reviewer 2: The most important thing about PVCs is that their lifetime is independent of a pod. So data will persist beyond a pod's lifetime.

Author: I think a reader will understand that from the title and the basic introduction. The "asking for storage without preference" is what makes PVCs noteworthy.

> This is powered by storage plugins. More specifically, Kubernetes implements the {{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Storage Interface" term_id="csi" >}} (CSI),

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately at this stage, we still have "in-tree" plugins and "csi" plugins. They both support PVCs so I don't think we should only talk about CSI here. Or maybe we name this section "Storage Extensions". But then I would remove the part about PVCs.

Author: I added a short paragraph addressing this.

which lets developers implement storage plugins without needing to make changes to the code of
Kubernetes itself. Visit
[Kubernetes Container Storage Interface Documentation])(https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/)
to learn more about CSI. 

> [FlexVolume](#flexvolume) is an another mechanism for storage plugins. Unlike CSI, FlexVolume is

Reviewer 2: We should say this is deprecated and CSI is the recommended way to develop storage plugins for Kubernetes.

more closely tied to Kubernetes and its storage implementation. FlexVolume was developed before CSI.

Storage plugin interfaces:

   * [CSI](#csi)
   * [FlexVolume](#flexvolume)
   * [persistentVolumeClaim](#persistentvolumeclaim)

### External Volume Types

Kubernetes directly implements some volume types for communicating with externally managed volumes, such as AWS EBS or Azure Disk Storage. These volume types are described as in-tree storage plugins. 

> The CSI was introduced to standardize connectivity to externally managed volumes, such as cloud platform storage. However, Kubernetes still includes many volume types for connecting to specific cloud storage providers. 

Reviewer 2: Reword something to something like "Using in-tree plugins are not recommended anymore. All new storage features are only supported for CSI volumes, and in-tree plugins are being replaced by their equivalent CSI drivers".

Author: added a callout on this

External Volume Types:
   * [awsElasticBlockStore](#awselasticblockstore)
   * [azureDisk](#azuredisk)
   * [azureFile](#azurefile)
   * [cinder](#cinder)

>    * [flocker](#flocker)

Reviewer 2: deprecated

Author: just to be clear -- should I delete the documentation for these deprecated types?

   * [gcePersistentDisk](#gcepersistentdisk)
   * [portworxVolume](#portworxvolume)

>    * [quobyte](#quobyte)

Reviewer 2: deprecated

>    * [storageos](#storageos)

Reviewer 2: deprecated

>    * [scaleIO](#scaleio)

Reviewer 2: deprecated

   * [vsphereVolume](#vspherevolume)

> ## Specify subPaths on volumes {#using-subpath}

Reviewer 2: The ordering of this section seems out of place? It's right in the middle of documenting the volume types

Author: I moved it up to after the spec example.

> The `volumeMounts.subPath` property specifies a sub-path inside the referenced volume instead of its root. For example, this property may be used to to share one volume for multiple uses in a single pod.

Reviewer 2: "The `volumeMounts.subPath` property mounts the subdirectory of the volume into the container"

```

The `log-config` ConfigMap is mounted as a volume, and all contents stored in
its `log_level` entry are mounted into the pod at path `/etc/config/log_level`.
Note that this path is derived from the volume's `mountPath` and the `path`
keyed with `log_level`.

> Text data is exposed as files using UTF-8 character encoding. To use some other character encoding, use binaryData.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values from ConfigMaps are exposed as text files, using UTF-8 character encoding. To use some other character encoding, or to store information that is not text, use the `binaryData` (rather than `data`) field in the ConfigMap.
```
Something like that? Could save rewording this for another PR, BTW.

### downwardAPI {#downwardapi}

A `downwardAPI` volume makes downward API data available to applications.
It mounts a directory and writes the requested data in plain text files.

{{< note >}}

> A container using downward API as a [`subPath`](#using-subpath) volume mount will not receive downward API updates.

Reviewer: Why this change? The original text makes more sense to me.

Author: not sure why I changed that -- reverted ✔

| `DirectoryOrCreate` | If nothing exists at the given path, an empty directory is created there as needed with permission set to 0755, having the same group and ownership with Kubelet. |
| `Directory` | A directory must exist at the given path |
| `FileOrCreate` | If nothing exists at the given path, an empty file is be created there as needed with permission set to 0644, having the same group and ownership with Kubelet. |
| `File` | A file must exist at the given path |
| `Socket` | A UNIX socket must exist at the given path |
| `CharDevice` | A character device must exist at the given path |
| `BlockDevice` | A block device must exist at the given path |

Watch out when using this type of volume, because:

* Pods with identical configuration (such as those created from a PodTemplate) may
  behave differently on different nodes due to different files on the nodes
* The files or directories created on the underlying hosts are only writable by root. You
  either need to run your process as root in a
  [privileged container](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/) or modify the file
  permissions on the host to be able to write to a `hostPath` volume

#### Resources

> The storage media (such as Disk or SSD) of an `emptyDir` volume is determined by the medium of the filesystem holding the kubelet root dir (typically

Reviewer 2: Move the references to `emptyDir` to the emptydir section?

Author: done, thank you for noticing this

| `BlockDevice` | A block device must exist at the given path |

Watch out when using this type of volume, because:

* Pods with identical configuration (such as those created from a PodTemplate) may
  behave differently on different nodes due to different files on the nodes
* The files or directories created on the underlying hosts are only writable by root. You
  either need to run your process as root in a
  [privileged container](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/) or modify the file
  permissions on the host to be able to write to a `hostPath` volume

#### Resources

The storage media (such as Disk or SSD) of an `emptyDir` volume is determined by the
medium of the filesystem holding the kubelet root dir (typically
`/var/lib/kubelet`). There is no limit on how much space an `emptyDir` or
`hostPath` volume can consume, and no isolation between containers or between
pods.

In the future, we expect that `emptyDir` and `hostPath` volumes will be able to
request a certain amount of space using a [resource](/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/)
specification, and to select the type of media to use, for clusters that have

> several media types.

Reviewer: We usually [avoid statements about the future](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-statements-about-the-future).

Author: I've revised this section with more updated information, based on https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/#setting-requests-and-limits-for-local-ephemeral-storage

Local volumes can only be used as a statically created PersistentVolume. Dynamic
provisioning is not supported.

> Compared to `hostPath` volumes, local volumes are used in a *durable and

Reviewer: The original is correct to write `local`, I think. If `hostPath` is in backticks then `local` should be too.
```suggestion
Compared to `hostPath` volumes, `local` volumes are used in a durable and
```

receive updates for those volume sources.
{{< /note >}}

### secret 

A `secret` volume is used to pass sensitive information, such as passwords, to
Pods. You can store secrets in the Kubernetes API and mount them as files for
use by pods without coupling to Kubernetes directly. `secret` volumes are
backed by tmpfs (a RAM-backed filesystem) so they are never written to
non-volatile storage.

{{< note >}}
A container using a Secret as a [`subPath`](#using-subpath) volume mount doesn't receive Secret updates.
{{< /note >}}

For more details, see [Configuring Secrets](/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/).

## Storage plugin interfaces

The out-of-tree volume plugins include the Container Storage Interface (CSI)

> and FlexVolume. They enable storage vendors to create custom storage plugins. The main Kubernetes binary implements the CSI, and communicates with any external plugins. This keeps the main binary efficient, and allows users to choose their own storage plugins. 

Reviewer 2: There's many Kubernetes binaries. Also they implement both CSI and FlexVolume interfaces.

Reviewer: Yep, it's wrong to write “the main Kubernetes binary”. It's OK to mention having code (not that 3.8 GiB is _that_ small) in-tree and easier ways for vendors to work at their own pace.

receive updates for those volume sources.
{{< /note >}}

### rbd

> An `rbd` volume allows a[Rados Block Device](https://ceph.com/docs/master/rbd/rbd/) (RBD) volume to mount into your pod. Unlike `emptyDir`, which is erased when a pod is removed, the contents of an `rbd` volume are preserved and the volume is unmounted. This means that a RBD volume can be pre-populated with data, and that data can be shared between pods. 

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
An `rbd` volume allows a [Rados Block Device](https://ceph.com/docs/master/rbd/rbd/) (RBD) volume to mount into your pod. Unlike `emptyDir`, which is erased when a pod is removed, the contents of an `rbd` volume are preserved and the volume is unmounted. This means that an RBD volume can be pre-populated with data, and that data can be shared between pods.
```
(this text'll be easier to work with if wrapped, though)

### cinder {#cinder}

{{< note >}}
Kubernetes must be configured with the OpenStack cloud provider.
{{< /note >}}

The `cinder` volume type is used to mount the OpenStack Cinder volume into your pod. 

#### Cinder volume configuration example

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-cinder
spec:
  containers:
  - image: k8s.gcr.io/test-webserver
    name: test-cinder-container
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /test-cinder
      name: test-volume
  volumes:
  - name: test-volume
    # This OpenStack volume must already exist.
    cinder:
      volumeID: <volume-id>
      fsType: ext4
```

#### OpenStack CSI migration

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.18" state="beta" >}}

The `CSIMigration` feature for Cinder, when enabled, redirects all plugin operations
from the existing in-tree plugin to the `cinder.csi.openstack.org` Container
Storage Interface (CSI) Driver. In order to use this feature, the [Openstack Cinder CSI
Driver](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-openstack/blob/master/docs/cinder-csi-plugin/using-cinder-csi-plugin.md)
must be installed on the cluster and the `CSIMigration` and `CSIMigrationOpenStack`
beta features must be enabled.

> ### flocker (depreceated) {#flocker}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### flocker (deprecated) {#flocker}
```

Using a GCE persistent disk with a Pod controlled by a ReplicaSet will fail unless the PD is read-only or the replica count is 0 or 1.

#### GCE persistent disk {#gce-create-persistent-disk}

Before you can use a GCE persistent disk with a pod, you need to create it.

```shell
gcloud compute disks create --size=500GB --zone=us-central1-a my-data-disk
```

#### GCE persistent disk configuration example

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: webserver-using-gce-pd
spec:
  containers:
  - image: k8s.gcr.io/test-webserver
    name: test-container
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /test-pd
      name: test-volume
  volumes:
  - name: test-volume
    # This GCE PD must already exist.
    gcePersistentDisk:
      pdName: my-data-disk
      fsType: ext4
```

#### Regional Persistent Disks
The [Regional Persistent Disks](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/#repds) feature allows the creation of Persistent Disks that are available in two zones within the same region. In order to use this feature, the volume must be provisioned as a PersistentVolume; referencing the volume directly from a pod is not supported.

#### Manually provisioning a Regional PD PersistentVolume

> Dynamic provisioning is possible using a [StorageClass for GCE PD](/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/#gce).

Reviewer: The correct link is actually like this:
```suggestion
Dynamic provisioning is possible using a [StorageClass for GCE PD](/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/#gce-pd).
```

The StorageOS container requires 64-bit Linux and has no additional dependencies. A free developer license is available.

You must run the StorageOS container on each node that wants to access StorageOS volumes or that will contribute storage capacity to the pool.
For installation instructions, consult the
[StorageOS documentation](https://docs.storageos.com).

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  labels:
    name: redis
    role: master
  name: test-storageos-redis
spec:
  containers:
    - name: master
      image: kubernetes/redis:v1
      env:
        - name: MASTER
          value: "true"
      ports:
        - containerPort: 6379
      volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /redis-master-data
          name: redis-data
  volumes:
    - name: redis-data
      storageos:
        # The `redis-vol01` volume must already exist within StorageOS in the `default` namespace.
        volumeName: redis-vol01
        fsType: ext4
```

For more information about StorageOS, dynamic provisioning, and PersistnetVolumeClaims, please see the
[StorageOS examples](https://github.com/kubernetes/examples/blob/master/volumes/storageos).

### vsphereVolume {#vspherevolume}

> A `vsphereVolume` is used to mount a vSphere VMDK Volume into your pod.  The contents of a volume are preserved when it is unmounted. It supports both VMFS and VSAN datastore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `vsphereVolume` is used to mount a VMWare vSphere VMDK Volume into your pod.  The contents of a volume are preserved when it is unmounted. It supports both VMFS and VSAN datastore.
```
?

non-volatile storage.

{{< note >}}
A container using a Secret as a [`subPath`](#using-subpath) volume mount doesn't receive Secret updates.
{{< /note >}}

For more details, see [Configuring Secrets](/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/).

> ## Storage plugin interfaces

Reviewer 2: The "storage plugin" section earlier in this doc seems to duplicate some of this section?

Author: I intended that earlier section to be a quick overview of the options, and this section to be a bit more detailed.

Reviewer 2: If this section is only for out of tree plugin extensions should we call this something like "External plugin extensions"

Reviewer 2: In terms of ordering, should we put this before or after listing all the in-tree types? fit seems a little strange that we're talking about external plugins in between 2 in-tree plugin sections

#### CSI ephemeral volumes

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.16" state="beta" >}}

You can directly configure CSI volumes within the pod
specification. Volumes specified in this way are ephemeral and do not
persist across pod restarts. See [Ephemeral
Volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/ephemeral-volumes/#csi-ephemeral-volume)
for more information.

For more information on how to develop a CSI driver, refer to the
[kubernetes-csi documentation](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/).

#### Migrating to CSI drivers from in-tree plugins

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.17" state="beta" >}}

The `CSIMigration` feature, when enabled, directs operations against existing in-tree plugins to corresponding CSI plugins (which are expected to be installed and configured).  
As a result, operators do not have to make any
configuration changes to existing Storage Classes, PersistentVolumes or PersistentVolumeClaims
(referring to in-tree plugins) when transitioning to a CSI driver that supersedes an in-tree plugin.

The operations and features that are supported include:
provisioning/delete, attach/detach, mount/unmount and resizing of volumes.

> In-tree plugins that support `CSIMigration` and have a corresponding CSI driver implemented are listed in [Types of Volumes](#volume-types).

Reviewer: If an in-tree plugin doesn't support CSI migration it's listed separately? Why this distinction?

Author: I'll rephrase this, it's really just moving things that are superseded by a CSI approach to a separate section.

between pods.

If you manually specify an `awsElasticBlockStore` volume, you must create an EBS volume using `aws ec2 create-volume` or the AWS API before you can use it.

Dynamic provisioning is a feature of the [AWS EBS CSI driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-ebs-csi-driver). The [AWS EKS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/ebs-csi.html) provides more information on dynamic provisioning of EBS volumes.

There are some restrictions when using an `awsElasticBlockStore` volume:

* the nodes on which pods are running must be AWS EC2 instances
* those instances need to be in the same region and availability-zone as the EBS volume
* EBS only supports a single EC2 instance mounting a volume

#### Creating an AWS EBS volume

Before you can use an EBS volume with a pod, you need to create it.

```shell
aws ec2 create-volume --availability-zone=eu-west-1a --size=10 --volume-type=gp2
```

Make sure the zone matches the zone where you want to mount that volume. Also check that the size and EBS volume type are suitable for your use.

#### AWS EBS configuration example

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:

>   name: test-ebs

Reviewer: `test-ebs` doesn't feel like a good name for a Pod, to be honest.

Author: how about `demo-webserver`?

Author: I used "webserver-using-aws-ebs" based on the other comment.

You must create a PD using `gcloud` or the GCE API or UI before you can use it.
{{< /caution >}}

There are some restrictions when using a `gcePersistentDisk`:

* the nodes on which pods are running must be GCE VMs
* those VMs need to be in the same GCE project and zone as the persistent disk.

One feature of GCE persistent disk is concurrent read-only access to a persistent disk.
A `gcePersistentDisk` volume permits multiple consumers to simultaneously
mount a persistent disk as read-only. This means that you can pre-populate a PD with your dataset
and then serve it in parallel from as many Pods as you need. Unfortunately,
PDs can only be mounted by a single consumer in read-write mode. Simultaneous
writers are not allowed.

Using a GCE persistent disk with a Pod controlled by a ReplicaSet will fail unless the PD is read-only or the replica count is 0 or 1.

#### GCE persistent disk {#gce-create-persistent-disk}

Before you can use a GCE persistent disk with a pod, you need to create it.

```shell
gcloud compute disks create --size=500GB --zone=us-central1-a my-data-disk
```

#### GCE persistent disk configuration example

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:

>   name: test-pd

Reviewer: How about `webserver-using-gce-pd`?

See the [RBD example](https://github.com/kubernetes/examples/tree/{{< param "githubbranch" >}}/volumes/rbd)
for more details.

### secret 

A `secret` volume is used to pass sensitive information, such as passwords, to
Pods. You can store secrets in the Kubernetes API and mount them as files for
use by pods without coupling to Kubernetes directly. `secret` volumes are
backed by tmpfs (a RAM-backed filesystem) so th ey are never written to
non-volatile storage.

{{< note >}}
A container using a Secret as a [`subPath`](#using-subpath) volume mount will not receive Secret updates.
{{< /note >}}

For more details, see [Configuring Secrets](/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/).

> ## Volume Plugin Interfaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Storage plugin interfaces
```

and FlexVolume. They enable storage vendors to create custom storage plugins. The main Kubernetes binary implements the CSI, and communicates with any external plugins. This keeps the main binary efficent, and allows users to choose their own storage plugins. 

Before the introduction of CSI and FlexVolume, all volume plugins (like
volume types listed above) were "in-tree" meaning they were built, linked,
compiled, and shipped with the core Kubernetes binaries and extend the core
Kubernetes API. This meant that adding a new storage system to Kubernetes (a
volume plugin) required checking code into the core Kubernetes code repository.

Both CSI and FlexVolume allow volume plugins to be developed independent of
the Kubernetes code base, and deployed (installed) on Kubernetes clusters as
extensions.

For storage vendors looking to create an out-of-tree volume plugin, please refer
to the [volume plugin FAQ](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-storage/volume-plugin-faq.md).

### csi

{{< note >}}
CSI drivers may not be compatible across all Kubernetes releases.
Please check the specific CSI driver's documentation for supported

> deployments steps for each Kubernetes release and a compatibility matrix.

Reviewer: This looks importamt; I would wrap this in a ` {{< note >}}` &hellip;  `{{< note >}}`

Author: It looks like it is to me - unless you are referring to something besides the CSI drivers.

Support for CSI spec versions 0.2 and 0.3 are deprecated in Kubernetes

> v1.13 and will be removed in a future release.

Reviewer: We don't need to keep this.

{{< /note >}}

> [Container Storage Interface](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md) (CSI) defines a standard interface for container orchestration systems (like Kubernetes) to expose arbitrary storage systems to their container workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Storage Interface" term_id="csi" >}}defines a standard interface for container orchestration systems (like Kubernetes) to expose arbitrary storage systems to their container workloads.
```
(it's OK to amend that glossary entry to, eg, add a further hyperlink).

Author: I added the link to the next paragraph.

Pods interact with FlexVolume drivers through the `flexvolume` in-tree volume plugin.
For more details, see the [FlexVolume](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-storage/flexvolume.md) examples.

### persistentVolumeClaim {#persistentvolumeclaim}

> A `persistentVolumeClaim` volume is used to mount a

Reviewer 2: I think the most imprtant aspect of a PVC is that the lifecycle is independent of a pod

Author: I added a note calling this out, thanks

must be installed on the cluster and the `CSIMigration` and `CSIMigrationvSphere`
[feature gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) must be enabled.

This also requires minimum vSphere vCenter/ESXi Version to be 7.0u1 and minimum HW Version to be VM version 15.

{{< note >}}
The following StorageClass parameters from the built-in `vsphereVolume` plugin are not supported by the vSphere CSI driver:

* `diskformat`
* `hostfailurestotolerate`
* `forceprovisioning`
* `cachereservation`
* `diskstripes`
* `objectspacereservation`
* `iopslimit`

Existing volumes created using these parameters will be migrated to the vSphere CSI driver, but new volumes created by the vSphere CSI driver will not be honoring these parameters.
{{< /note >}}

#### vSphere CSI migration complete {#vsphere-csi-migration-complete}
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.19" state="beta" >}}

To turn off the `vsphereVolume` plugin from being loaded by the controller manager and the kubelet, you need to set this feature flag to `true`. You must install a `csi.vsphere.vmware.com` {{< glossary_tooltip text="CSI" term_id="csi" >}} driver on all worker nodes.

> ## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}

Reviewer 2: Should we point to the persistent volumes page and any of the storage tasks?

Author: We already link to the persistent volumes page. I'll add links to mount propagation, and sub-path ex.

> Learn more about managing storage declaratively using [Persistent Volumes](https://k8s.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/).

Reviewer 2: I think the most important part is the persistent lifecycle, not the declaritive nature

Author: I reworded this.

Pods interact with FlexVolume drivers through the `flexvolume` in-tree volume plugin.
For more details, see the [FlexVolume](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-storage/flexvolume.md) examples.

### persistentVolumeClaim {#persistentvolumeclaim}

A `persistentVolumeClaim` volume is used to mount a
[PersistentVolume](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) into a pod. PersistentVolumeClaims are a way for users to "claim" durable storage (such as a GCE PersistentDisk or an iSCSI volume) without knowing the details of the particular cloud environment.

See the information about [PersistentVolumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) for more

> details.

Reviewer: Also consider linking to PersistentVolumeClaim.

Author: the introduction of the linked page introduces both terms

> ## External Volume Providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## External storage providers
```
I'm not sure that I could explain what these are external to.

Author: The concept was "externally managed" (i.e., cloud providers, X as a service), but I'm open to alternative terminology.

### awsElasticBlockStore {#awselasticblockstore}

> An `awsElasticBlockStore` volume mounts an Amazon Web Services (AWS) [EBS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `awsElasticBlockStore` volume mounts a filesystem stored on an Amazon
Web Services (AWS) _[EBS](https://aws.amazon.com/ebs/) volume_ into your pod.
Unlike
```
?
```

Volume](https://aws.amazon.com/ebs/) into your pod.  Unlike
`emptyDir`, which is erased when a pod is removed, the contents of an EBS
volume are preserved and the volume is merely unmounted.  This means that an
EBS volume can be pre-populated with data, and that data can be shared
between pods.

{{< caution >}}

> You must create an EBS volume using `aws ec2 create-volume` or the AWS API before you can use it.

Reviewer: BTW, Kubernetes now offers [dynamic provisioning](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/dynamic-provisioning/) for storage.

Author: noted, thanks!

{{< /caution >}}

There are some restrictions when using an `awsElasticBlockStore` volume:

* the nodes on which pods are running must be AWS EC2 instances
* those instances need to be in the same region and availability-zone as the EBS volume
* EBS only supports a single EC2 instance mounting a volume

#### Creating an AWS EBS volume

Before you can use an EBS volume with a pod, you need to create it.

```shell
aws ec2 create-volume --availability-zone=eu-west-1a --size=10 --volume-type=gp2
```

> Make sure the zone matches the zone you brought up your cluster in.  (And also check that the size and EBS volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure the zone matches the zone where you want to mount that volume.
(And also check that the size and EBS volume
```

must be installed on the cluster and the `CSIMigration` and `CSIMigrationvSphere`
[feature gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) must be enabled.

This also requires minimum vSphere vCenter/ESXi Version to be 7.0u1 and minimum HW Version to be VM version 15.

{{< note >}}
The following StorageClass parameters from the built-in `vsphereVolume` plugin are not supported by the vSphere CSI driver:

* `diskformat`
* `hostfailurestotolerate`
* `forceprovisioning`
* `cachereservation`
* `diskstripes`
* `objectspacereservation`
* `iopslimit`

Existing volumes created using these parameters will be migrated to the vSphere CSI driver, but new volumes created by the vSphere CSI driver will not be honoring these parameters.
{{< /note >}}

#### vSphere CSI migration complete {#vsphere-csi-migration-complete}
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.19" state="beta" >}}

To turn off the `vsphereVolume` plugin from being loaded by the controller manager and the kubelet, you need to set this feature flag to `true`. You must install a `csi.vsphere.vmware.com` {{< glossary_tooltip text="CSI" term_id="csi" >}} driver on all worker nodes.

## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}

> 

Reviewer: I would direct the reader to read https://k8s.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/
